EU states expel three Russian diplomats in tit-for-tat

The Kremlin accused the three EU diplomats of participating in mass street protests in support of jailed opposition leader Alexei Navalny.

Their expulsion was announced while EU foreign affairs chief Josep Borrell was visiting Moscow on Friday.

The three countries affected condemned Russia's move as unjustified.

One Russian diplomat must now leave the Berlin embassy, another the Stockholm embassy and a third the Russian consulate in Poznan, Poland.

The German foreign ministry said its diplomat expelled from Moscow had merely been "observing developments in Russia by lawful means", in line with diplomatic conventions.

Mr Borrell published a blog piece on Sunday giving a bleak assessment of the state of EU-Russia ties.

He wrote that "an aggressively-staged press conference and the expulsion of three EU diplomats during my visit indicate that the Russian authorities did not want to seize this opportunity to have a more constructive dialogue with the EU".

The signals he received from Russia, he said, "confirmed that Europe and Russia are drifting apart".

The EU has condemned the jailing of Navalny and called for his immediate release. It has also urged Russia to hold a transparent investigation into the poisoning of Navalny last August with the nerve agent Novichok.

Navalny, 44, accuses Russian President Vladimir Putin of directly ordering the attack.

The Kremlin denies any role in the poisoning and disputes the Western conclusion that Novichok - an extremely toxic Russian chemical weapon - was used.

Last October, the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) concluded that Novichok had poisoned Navalny. That was also the conclusion of toxicology experts in Germany, Sweden and France.

Navalny - a fierce critic of President Putin - nearly died, but got emergency treatment first in Siberia, then in Berlin.

His return to Russia on 17 January and immediate arrest triggered mass protests by his supporters across the country.

https://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-55982544


Russia expels European diplomats over Navalny protests

Russia has expelled three diplomats from Germany, Sweden and Poland for joining protests in support of opposition activist Alexei Navalny, who was jailed earlier this week.

The Russian foreign ministry said the three took part in "illegal demonstrations" on 23 January.

The diplomats' home countries have condemned the expulsions, as have the UK, France and the EU.

Mr Navalny is a vociferous critic of Russian President Vladimir Putin.

The expulsions were announced just a few hours after EU foreign affairs chief Josep Borrell met Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov in Moscow.

Hundreds of thousands of people took part in protests in support of Mr Navalny across Russia on 23 and 31 January. Thousands were arrested.

Germany denounced the expulsion as being "in no way justified" and said it would not "go unanswered" if Russia did not reconsider.

Sweden said the claim that its diplomat took part in the protest on 23 January was unfounded and said it reserved the right to an appropriate response.

Poland said the expulsion could lead to the "further deepening of the crisis in bilateral relations".

Mr Borrell, on behalf of the EU, said he "strongly condemned this decision and rejected the allegations that they conducted activities incompatible with their status as foreign diplomats".

However, Mr Lavrov said any European sanctions over Mr Navalny's treatment would be illegitimate.

Both Germany and Poland said they had summoned their respective Russian ambassadors to express concern over the expulsions - a move that could possibly lead to tit-for-tat measures and more diplomats being sent home.

https://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-55954162


Russia Navalny trial a 'low point' in EU-Russia relations, says Borrell

The EU has told Russia the case against jailed Putin critic Alexei Navalny is a "low point" in their relations, as the dissident faces a new charge in court.

EU foreign affairs chief Josep Borrell met Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov in Moscow, with new EU sanctions over Navalny's case a possibility.

Navalny is back in court, accused of slandering a World War Two veteran who appeared in a pro-Putin video.

On Tuesday he was jailed for nearly three years in a fraud case.

Navalny, 44, accuses President Vladimir Putin of ordering the nerve agent attack that nearly killed him last August, but the Kremlin denies involvement.

The Kremlin critic was jailed for violating the terms of his 2014 suspended sentence for fraud - a case he ridiculed, saying the Russian authorities knew full well that he was getting emergency medical treatment in Berlin last year. He says the cases against him are trumped-up, intended to silence him.

He was taken into custody when he returned to Russia last month. His treatment by Russian authorities has drawn condemnation from the EU, the UK government and Europe's main human rights watchdog, the Council of Europe.

Thousands of his supporters have been arrested in recent days; many were held when they defied heavy security on the streets of Moscow and St Petersburg after he was jailed on Tuesday.

'Human rights issues essential for common future'
In Moscow Mr Borrell said "certainly our relations are under severe strain and the Navalny case is a low point", as he met Mr Lavrov. In a press conference afterwards, Mr Borrell said he had conveyed the EU's deep concern and reiterated the bloc's appeal for Navalny's release, as well as the launch of an investigation into his poisoning.

"While we fully respect Russian sovereignty... the European Union considers issues related to the rule of law, human rights, civil society and political freedom are central to our common future."

The Russian foreign minister warned of unpredictable consequences if relations worsened further, adding that both sides were keen to have broader dialogue in areas where they agreed.

He said relations "are not at their best, including due to one-sided, illegitimate restrictions introduced by the EU under trumped-up pretexts".

On Thursday, US President Joe Biden said Navalny "should be released immediately and without condition", describing his case as "politically motivated".

In October the EU imposed sanctions on six top Russian officials and a Russian chemical weapons research centre, accusing them of direct involvement in the poisoning of Navalny. Russia retaliated with tit-for-tat sanctions. It disputes the finding by Western experts that Novichok - a Russian chemical weapon - was used.

Sanctions will be on the agenda again when EU foreign ministers meet on 22 February. But Mr Borrell said that "there is no proposal for the time being by any member state" regarding further measures.

Russia remains a key economic partner for many members of the 27-nation bloc, and Germany's Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline project with Russia is highly controversial.

The slander case against Navalny dates back to last June, when he tweeted that celebrities and 94-year-old war veteran Ignat Artemenko, who appeared in a pro-Putin video, were "a disgrace to the country. People without conscience. Traitors".

The video was about a controversial constitutional reform, proposed by Mr Putin and then passed after a referendum. It paves the way for Mr Putin to get re-elected, if he runs for president again.

If Navalny is found guilty in this latest trial, he will face a fine or community service, his lawyer has said. The law was changed to make the alleged offence punishable by a jail term, but the Navalny case occurred before the law was changed, according to his lawyer.

What has Navalny said?

In an Instagram post from jail, he urged his supporters to resist "intimidation" and insisted they could still "liberate" the country from the "thieves and occupiers" in charge.

Navalny said he still felt like a "free person" because of his "belief in the righteousness of my cause". He described his treatment since his return to Russia as "Putin's personal revenge on me... or the fact that I survived, that I dared to return."

He thanked his supporters, who have held two weeks of demonstrations in dozens of cities.

"Do not allow yourself to be intimidated. Don't allow yourself to be fooled by an illusion of strength and swagger," his statement said.

"They can only hold on to power, using it for their own enrichment, by relying on our fear. Instead, by fighting our fear, we can liberate our Motherland from the little band of thieves and occupiers. And we will do this."

How have his supporters responded?

Mr Navalny's Anti-Corruption Foundation (FBK) said it had decided not to stage protests during the coming weekend, in the interests of preserving itself long-term.

FBK manager Leonid Volkov warned that new rallies could "paralyse" the work of the Navalny camp, following mass arrests over the past two weeks.

He said street protests would resume in the spring, adding that the team was also focusing on parliamentary elections scheduled for September.

https://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-55938042


Alexei Navalny: Russia's vociferous Putin critic

Anti-corruption campaigner Alexei Navalny has long been the most prominent face of Russian opposition to President Vladimir Putin.

The 44-year-old blogger has millions of Russian followers on social media - many in their early 20s or younger - and managed to get some of his supporters elected to local councils in Siberia in 2020.

His return to Moscow and immediate arrest on 17 January, after five months recovering in Berlin from a near-fatal nerve agent attack, triggered mass protests across Russia by his supporters. Police responded with force and thousands were detained for attending the unauthorised rallies.

He says Mr Putin's United Russia party is full of "crooks and thieves" and accuses the president of "sucking the blood out of Russia" through a "feudal state" concentrating power in the Kremlin. That patronage system, he claims, is like tsarist Russia.

He speaks the street language of younger Russians and uses it to powerful effect on social media. His Anti-Corruption Foundation (FBK) has made detailed claims about official corruption.

They include the recent "Putin's palace" video on YouTube about a vast luxury Black Sea palace, allegedly gifted to Mr Putin by rich associates. Its comforts are said to include a skating rink, casino and vineyard.

More than 100m people have viewed that video, published after Navalny's arrest. The Kremlin dismissed it as a "pseudo-investigation" and Mr Putin called it "boring", denying the claims. Later billionaire businessman Arkady Rotenberg, one of Mr Putin's closest friends, said it was his own palace.

Controversial court case

On 2 February a Moscow court ruled that Navalny must spend two years and eight months in prison for violating the terms of a 2014 suspended sentence for fraud.

More than a thousand supporters were arrested that night, as armoured riot police cordoned off streets around the courthouse.

The case against Navalny was based on his failure to report regularly to police during 2020 - an absurdity, his legal team argued, as the authorities knew full well that he was getting emergency treatment in Berlin for the Novichok nerve agent attack. He reminded the court that for part of that time he was in a coma.

Navalny argued that between January and August 2020, before the poisoning, he had reported to police twice a month. He dismissed the fraud case as fabricated in order to silence him.

The case concerns alleged embezzlement from a Russian subsidiary of French cosmetics firm Yves Rocher and from a timber firm, Kirovles. His brother Oleg was jailed for three-and-a-half years and Alexei got the same term, but suspended.

That 2014 fraud conviction itself was condemned in 2016 by the European Court of Human Rights, which found that Navalny's rights had been violated, and it ordered Russia to pay him and Oleg compensation. But later the Russian Supreme Court upheld the conviction.

Surviving 'Novichok' poisoning

Navalny's battle against Mr Putin, 68, is now intensely personal: he accuses the president of ordering state agents to poison him - and he repeated that allegation in court.

"His main gripe with me is that he'll go down in history as a poisoner," Navalny told the court scornfully. "We had Alexander the Liberator, Yaroslav the Wise, and we will have Vladimir the Underpants Poisoner."

Underpants became a social media meme in Russia after Navalny carried out a telephone sting in December on a Russian FSB state security agent, who revealed that Novichok, a highly toxic Russian chemical weapon, had been smeared on Navalny's underwear.

In August 2020 Navalny collapsed on a flight over Siberia and was rushed to hospital in Omsk. That emergency landing saved his life. A German-based charity persuaded Russian officials to allow him to be airlifted to Berlin for treatment.

In September the German government revealed that tests carried out by the military found "unequivocal proof of a chemical nerve warfare agent of the Novichok group". The Kremlin denied any involvement and rejected the Novichok finding.

The EU then imposed sanctions on six top Russian officials and a Russian chemical weapons research centre, accusing them of direct involvement in the poisoning. Russia retaliated with tit-for-tat sanctions.

Novichok was the chemical weapon which nearly killed former Russian spy Sergei Skripal and his daughter Yulia in Salisbury, England, in March 2018. A local woman died later from contact with Novichok.

Mr Putin admitted that the state was keeping Navalny under surveillance - it was justified, he alleged, because US spies were helping the blogger.

Detective work by the investigative group Bellingcat pointed to long-running Federal Security Service (FSB) shadowing of Navalny - despite the official denials. And Bellingcat named agents it suspected of poisoning him.

Alexei Navalny - The basics

Born on 4 June 1976 in Butyn, a village just west of Moscow

Grew up in Obninsk, a town 100km (62 miles) south-west of Moscow

Graduated in law at Moscow's Friendship of the Peoples University in 1998

Spent a student year in the US as a Yale World Fellow in 2010

Lives in Moscow with his wife Yulia; they have two children - daughter Daria (studying in the US) and young son Zakhar

Anti-corruption campaign

The next big test is whether Navalny can still organise - from jail - big, unauthorised street protests against official corruption. The police have cracked down hard, detaining his wife Yulia and his top FBK assistants.

For years he has led nationwide protests, but in 2018 he was barred from challenging Mr Putin at the ballot box, because of his fraud conviction.

Navalny is familiar with the physical risks in Russia, having been attacked before the Novichok poisoning. And he has been arrested repeatedly.

In 2019, he was diagnosed with contact dermatitis whilst in jail, with his doctor suggesting he might have been exposed to "some toxic agent".

He has also twice been targeted with antiseptic green dye known as zelyonka and suffered chemical burns to an eye.

His rise as a force in Russian politics began in 2008, when he started blogging about alleged malpractice and corruption at some of Russia's big state-controlled corporations.

One of his tactics was to become a minority shareholder in major oil companies, banks and ministries, and to ask awkward questions about holes in state finances.

While he has long been a thorn in the Kremlin's side, Navalny also has critics among opposition groups, not least for what some see as his Russian nationalism.

In a radio interview in 2014 he was asked about President Putin's annexation of Ukraine's Crimean peninsula. He said that despite Crimea being "seized" in violation of international law, "the reality is that Crimea is now part of Russia". "Crimea is ours," he said.

When he was briefly jailed in July 2013 for embezzlement in the city of Kirov, the five-year sentence was widely seen as political.

He was unexpectedly allowed out of prison to campaign for the Moscow mayoral elections, in which he was runner-up with 27% of the vote, behind Putin ally Sergei Sobyanin.

That was considered a dramatic success as he had no access to state TV, relying only on the internet and word of mouth.

Navalny told the BBC the best thing Western states could do for justice in Russia was to crack down on "dirty money".

"I want people involved in corruption and persecution of activists to be barred from entering these countries, to be denied visas."

https://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-16057045


Why jailing Navalny may mean more problems for Putin

When long rows of riot police took up positions in central Moscow on Tuesday evening, the message was clear: all protests in support of opposition leader Alexei Navalny would be crushed.

For the next few hours, those who dared to test the authorities' resolve were chased through the streets. Images of arrests - police batons flying - were soon being streamed live online.

The scenes came just hours after a judge ruled that Russian President Vladimir Putin's fiercest critic would spend the next couple of years behind bars.

Navalny denounced the hearing as a show trial meant to "scare millions" and quash dissent.

But muzzling him and his message may not be as easy as the Kremlin hopes.

Tough tactics may backfire

"I think it's only the beginning of problems for the regime, because Navalny became not only a political force but a moral one, which makes him more attractive to those who weren't previously his followers," argues Andrei Kolesnikov, of the Moscow Carnegie Centre.

"It's not just the political opposition, but civil society that's irritated by the cruelty - the behaviour of the police and the courts."

The Kremlin has long painted Navalny as an "agent" of the West bent on undermining Russia, whilst insisting that the courts are entirely independent and that angry protesters are "hooligans". President Putin's spokesman has praised the security forces for coming down "hard" on "provocateurs".

But some here warn that the tough tactics could backfire.

"The crackdown on Alexei Navalny, which is shocking in its cruelty… is also shockingly foolish," wrote Filipp Styorkin for the independent VTimes website.

He argues that Navalny's prison sentence will fuel further protest, not stop it. Not ideal for the Kremlin in uncertain economic times.

"The authorities persistently saw into the legs of the chair they're sitting on, even though the chair looks increasingly flimsy as it is," Mr Styorkin said.

Many at street rallies do say they are protesting for the first time, and less for Alexei Navalny than against the harsh way he has been treated.

On Tuesday evening, after the court hearing, drivers in central Moscow hooted their horns in solidarity with those protesting - still too nervous to stop and join in, but a hint that frustration could be widespread.

That includes anger at the high-level corruption that Navalny's investigations have exposed: especially galling as Russians have seen their own lives get tougher.

Prison unlikely to silence leader

There is some discussion here about how popular the Kremlin's uncompromising stance might be amongst senior officials, as Western governments consider new sanctions: asset freezes and travel bans are an acceptable price for a patriotic project like "returning" Crimea, but targeting an opposition politician may be a less popular cause.

It's not yet clear how long this wave of protests might last.

They may well subside until the next likely flash point - parliamentary elections in autumn, when Mr Navalny had plans to "decimate" the pro-Kremlin United Russia party at the polls.

His team will now attempt to execute that plan without him.

"It will be tough," Lyubov Sobol admitted last week, when asked how Mr Navalny's team would cope if their leader was sent to prison. "Alexei is our inspiration. But we'll work with even more passion if it happens, fuelled by our anger."

That commitment was immediately challenged, as Ms Sobol and several others were placed under house arrest. They are facing criminal charges - and possibly prison sentences - for calling people to a protest in a pandemic.

Mr Navalny will clearly struggle to rally his supporters and command his team from behind bars, especially if the authorities pursue further, pending charges against him, as many suspect.

But the man who survived a poison attack, then returned to confront those he blames, is unlikely to be fully silenced.

Mobile phones are banned in Russian prison camps, but are commonly available, and Navalny will be able to make occasional authorised calls and have visitors.

Just last week, while on remand, he managed to post a message from prison on Instagram calling on Russians to overcome their fear and protest.

"No-one wants to live in a country where lawlessness and corruption rule," he wrote, a country whose leaders imprison "everyone who speaks out". His words were "liked" by close to a million people.

"Navalny became the persecuted victim, courageous," Andrei Kolesnikov argues, likening the opposition figure in that sense to Soviet-era dissidents such as Andrei Sakharov, who was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize.

"Now the situation became black and white," he says, adding: "You can support Putin or Navalny."

https://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-55918159


Russia: Mass detentions after Putin critic Navalny jailed

More than 1,400 people were detained in Russia during Tuesday's protests in support of jailed opposition leader Alexei Navalny, rights monitors say.

In Moscow, riot police were filmed beating demonstrators with batons.

Navalny, 44, was earlier jailed for three-and-a-half years for violating the conditions of a suspended sentence. He says the case was fabricated.

He returned to Russia in January after being treated in Germany for a near-fatal nerve agent attack last August.

Navalny says Russian President Vladimir Putin ordered the attack with the Novichok agent, describing him as a "poisoner". The Kremlin denies the allegation and its spokesman Dmitry Peskov said the police response to Tuesday's "unauthorised" protests was justified.

The EU, the US and the UK have all condemned Tuesday's court verdict, demanding the opposition leader be immediately released. The German government said it would discuss further steps with its EU partners, adding that new sanctions could not be ruled out.

Navalny has already served time under house arrest and his lawyer says he faces two years and eight months in prison.

What happened during Tuesday's protests?

Hundreds of protesters gathered in central Moscow after the court's decision.

Soon there were violent scenes in the capital, with video on social media showing police beating and arresting those who came out to support Alexei Navalny. One journalist was seen being hit on the head with a baton by a police officer.

Russia's OVD-Info human rights monitors said 1,170 people were detained on Tuesday in Moscow, and 251 in St Petersburg, the country's second-largest city.

Another 17 people were held in smaller Russian cities.

The authorities have not commented on the reported numbers.

Last month, thousands of people were detained during two days of protests across the country.

https://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-55913614


Putin critic Navalny jailed in Russia despite protests

A Moscow court has jailed Putin critic Alexei Navalny for three-and-a-half years for violating the conditions of a suspended sentence.

He has been in detention since returning to Russia last month. He was treated in Germany for a near-fatal nerve agent attack on him in August.

There have been violent scenes in Moscow - video on social media show police beating and arresting protesters who came out to support Mr Navalny.

Thousands have rallied across Russia.

Mr Navalny's suspended sentence for embezzlement has been converted into a jail term. He has already served a year under house arrest which will be deducted from the total.

Mr Navalny greeted the news with a resigned shrug, the BBC's Sarah Rainsford in Moscow reports. In court he called President Vladimir Putin a "poisoner", blaming him for the attack.

His supporters called for an immediate protest, and hundreds gathered in central Moscow and St Petersburg despite a heavy police presence. More than 850 have been detained in Moscow alone, according to monitors.

Mr Navalny's lawyer said they would appeal against Tuesday's ruling.

https://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-55910974


‘Navalny is no real threat to Russian political system’

Support for Putin critic Alexei Navalny is limited in Russia, a pro-Kremlin journalist and former MP of President Vladimir Putin’s United Russia party, told BBC World News.

Speaking before Mr Navalny was jailed for three-and-half years for violating conditions of a suspended sentence, Sergei Markov, told BBC World News: “Alexi Navalny is no real threat to the Russian political system.”

Mr Navalny had said in court that the charges against him were fabricated and again blamed Mr Putin for a nerve agent attack on him last year.

The Kremlin has denied any involvement in the attack and rejects the conclusion by Western experts that a Russian chemical weapon - Novichok - was used.

Thousands of pro-Navalny supporters have rallied across Russia.

https://www.bbc.com/news/av/world-europe-55910838


Navalny: More than 200 held as court considers jailing Putin critic

Russian police have detained more than 200 people near a Moscow court which is considering whether to jail Kremlin critic Alexei Navalny, monitors say.

Mr Navalny said in court the charges against him were fabricated and again blamed President Vladimir Putin for a nerve agent attack on him last August.

Mr Putin "will go down in history as a poisoner", he said vehemently.

The hearing is to decide whether to turn Mr Navalny's suspended sentence into an actual prison term.

He could face up to three-and-a-half years, in a case that has sparked nationwide protests.

The verdict is expected at 20:00 local time (17:00 GMT), a court spokeswoman has said.

Many riot police, including some on horses, are deployed outside the court.

The arrests were reported by the Russian OVD-Info monitoring group, which documents police activities, and by the Moscow Public Monitoring Commission (ONK), a human rights body.

Mr Navalny's return to Russia on 17 January triggered mass protests in support of him, many of them young Russians who have only ever experienced President Putin's rule.

Mr Navalny has been accused of breaking the terms of a 2014 suspended sentence for embezzlement that required him to report regularly to Russian police. His lawyers say the accusation is absurd as the authorities knew he was recovering in Berlin from the nerve agent attack that nearly killed him in Russia.

Addressing the court on Tuesday, Mr Navalny said the case was being used to frighten the opposition: "This is how it works: they send one to jail to intimidate millions."

On the Novichok chemical attack, he said: "Using the FSB [Federal Security Service of Russia], Putin attempted to commit murder. I'm not the only one - many know this already and many others will. And this is driving the thieving little man in the bunker crazy.

"No matter how much he tries to look like a geopolitician, he took offence at me because he will go down in history as a poisoner."

The Kremlin has denied any involvement, and rejects the conclusion by Western experts that Novichok - a Russian chemical weapon - was used.

In an angry exchange with a prosecutor in court, Mr Navalny said that in January-August 2020 he had shown up at the probation service regularly as required. "And you were happy with that!" he exclaimed.

In November 2016 Mr Navalny received a payout from the justice ministry worth about €53,000 (£47,000), in line with a European Court of Human Rights (ECHR) ruling that his rights had been violated in the prosecution for alleged embezzlement.

https://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-55900490


Khrushchev's great-granddaughter on 'Putin the Great'

Prof Nina Krushcheva, of International Affairs at the New School in New York says Russia's President Putin sees himself as the latest in a long line of Russian "greats" like Peter the Great or Ivan the Great.

Prof Krushcheva, who is also the great-granddaughter of former Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev, said Putin represented the state and the police and security services were behaving as if they were defending the motherland in their treatment of protesters demanding the release of the jailed opposition leader Alexei Navalny.

She told BBC World News: "I think we are entering a very, very shaky situation in Russia right now."

https://www.bbc.com/news/av/world-europe-55891873


Navalny: Thousands join fresh protests across Russia

Thousands of Russians have been taking part in unauthorised protests to demand the release of the jailed opposition leader Alexei Navalny.

More than 5,000 people have been detained, a monitoring group says. In Moscow police closed metro stations and blocked off the city centre.

Mr Navalny was jailed on his return to Russia after recovering from an attempt to kill him with a nerve agent.

He blames the security services for the attack but the Kremlin denies this.

The opposition figure was arrested after arriving in Moscow from Germany, where he spent months recovering from the near-fatal incident.

Russian authorities say Mr Navalny was supposed to report to police regularly because of a suspended sentence for embezzlement.

Mr Navalny has denounced his detention as "blatantly illegal", saying the authorities had allowed him to travel to Berlin for treatment for the Novichok poisoning, which happened in Russia last August.

Mr Navalny has blamed state security agents under Mr Putin's orders for the attempt on his life and investigative journalists have named Russian FSB agents suspected of the poisoning. But the Kremlin denies involvement and disputes the conclusion, by Western weapons experts, that Novichok was used.

Meanwhile, Russian President Vladimir Putin has denied reports he is the owner of a vast palace on the Black Sea, as alleged by Mr Navalny in a video that has gone viral in Russia and has been watched more than 100m times.

https://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-55876033


Russian billionaire Arkady Rotenberg says 'Putin Palace' is his

Russian oligarch Arkady Rotenberg says he is the owner of an opulent Black Sea mansion, not President Vladimir Putin, as the leaders' critics had alleged.

A video report about the vast palace, by Kremlin critic Alexei Navalny, went viral across Russia and has now been watched more than 100m times.

The Russian president rubbished reports he owned the resort earlier this week.

Mr Rotenberg, a billionaire with close links to Mr Putin, went public claiming to be the owner on Saturday.

The revelation came in an interview posted on the pro-Kremlin Mash Telegram channel, before being confirmed to the Interfax news agency.

"I have managed to strike a deal with creditors a few years ago, and I became a beneficiary of this site a few years ago," Mr Rotenberg's press office quoted him as saying.

Mr Rotenberg said the property will be completed "in a couple of years" and is expected to become an apartment hotel.

The claim comes as a crackdown against opposition figures intensifies across Russia.

Why has the palace been in the news?

Controversy over the property has been rife following the publication of the documentary by jailed Kremlin critic Alexei Navalny's team earlier this month.

Their investigation alleged the property cost £1bn ($1.37bn) and was paid for "with the largest bribe in history".

The BBC's Tim Whewell previously reported on the mysterious palace back in 2012, quoting a former business associate of Mr Putin who alleged that the mansion was built to his specifications for his personal use - but a spokesman dismissed the allegations at the time.

Earlier this week, the Russian president directly denied that he or his family owned it and described the video about it as "boring".

The allegations about the palace have taken off on Russian social media, including video platform TikTok. The corruption allegations helped spur on protests held throughout the country last weekend in support of Mr Navalny - the biggest seen against President Putin in years.

More than 4,000 people were arrested as large crowds took to cities across Russia demanding Mr Navalny's release.

The anti-corruption campaigner was immediately taken into custody after returning to Russia on a flight from Germany, where he had been recovering from an attempt to kill him with a nerve agent last year.

Both the heavy-handed police response and the continued detention of Mr Nalavany has drawn sharp international criticism.

Despite this, a crackdown seems to be intensifying.

A number of close associates of Mr Navalny have been detained since last week and others, including his brother and Pussy Riot activist Maria Alyokhina, have been put under house arrest.

The chief editor of a Russian website specialising in human rights, Sergei Smirnov, was also arrested outside his home on Saturday. News of his detention, apparently over allegations he participated in last week's protests, has been condemned by other journalists.

Further demonstrations are expected on Sunday, despite fresh police warnings about gatherings.

Officials have said that public transport routes and pedestrian movement will be limited across Moscow to try to curb protests.

Who is Arkady Rotenberg?

Mr Rotenberg is a significant figure in Russia as the owner of huge construction firms which build infrastructure like bridges and gas pipelines. He is known to be close to Mr Putin as a former childhood friend and judo partner.

Mr Rotenberg and his brother were implicated during the FinCEN file revelations late last year.

The businessman has been under US sanctions since 2014, when officials described him as a member of the "Russian leadership's inner circle" who they claimed provided "support for Putin's pet projects".

https://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-55872249


Russian anti-Putin anger spreads: 'We have to protest'

Filip Kuznetsov spent an entire night crammed into a police van with 17 other protesters because Moscow's detention centres were all full.

He was among a record 4,002 people arrested across Russia last week, as large crowds took to the streets to demand the release of the opposition politician Alexei Navalny. Further protests have been called for Sunday, threatening to strain the system even further.

"We didn't sleep all night. One person always had to stand for space, so we took it in turns," Filip told me by phone on Wednesday from the back of the police van, which he described as an "ancient vehicle with metal bars all round".

Anti-corruption campaigner Alexei Navalny, fiercely critical of the Kremlin, was imprisoned on his recent return to Russia after recovering from an attempt to kill him with a nerve agent.

A judge had sentenced Filip to 10 days in custody on Monday for his part in the protest. But it took police a further two days to find space in city cells. By the time we spoke, his group had been waiting outside Moscow Detention Centre No 2 for 17 hours, fed only by volunteers who brought sandwiches to the van.

'Anyone could be next'

Filip, a small-business owner, is not a fan or follower of Mr Navalny, but he is disturbed by how a fellow citizen is being treated.

"They're punishing him for nothing - which means anyone could be next, including me," he explained.

Few protesters we spoke to at Moscow's Pushkin Square last Saturday mentioned Mr Navalny's near-fatal poisoning, but all were shocked at how his flight home had been diverted so he could be detained at the border. He then faced a bizarre, makeshift court hearing in a police station.

One poll suggests as many as 42% in the Moscow crowd were moved to protest for the first time. The rallies were also unprecedented in their spread, covering towns and cities usually seen as politically "passive".

"In Moscow, we have safety in numbers, places to work if we get fired, but in the regions it's much more constricted," political scientist Ekaterina Schulmann points out. "People there take higher risks."

'In the regions people are much angrier'

In Vladivostok, Russia's far east, Mr Navalny's team say there haven't been demonstrations in the city on last Saturday's scale for over a decade.

Katerina Ostapenko, his local co-ordinator there, did not take part herself: she was picked up by police the day before. But she says up to 3,000 people came out, motivated partly by Navalny's latest video exposé: a corruption investigation targeting President Vladimir Putin himself.

The film claimed that Mr Putin had a secret, opulent palace built for him on the Black Sea, complete with an aqua-disco and a pole-dancing salon.

"I think people in the regions are much angrier and that's why so many protested," Ms Ostapenko told me. "They're really angry because they have no money, and now look how much Putin has! And it's our tax money that paid for his palace."

Vladimir Putin has denied any link to the giant property in Gelendzhik, calling the film a poor montage meant to brainwash people. It's already been watched on YouTube more than 100 million times.

"The number of views is staggering," Ekaterina Schulmann says, arguing that the scale of subsequent protests reflects deepening discontent here.

"[There's] the year of lockdown measures, the frustration and weariness collected inside people in that time, and the ongoing economic stagnation and declining incomes," she notes, adding that Mr Putin's trust rating has been sliding since his re-election two years ago.

"We are in a turbulent period."

So, unsurprisingly, the response to Saturday's protest has been swift and hard.

After rounding up thousands of protesters on the day, issuing fines or short-term detention, officials are now going after key allies of Alexei Navalny including his brother, doctor, and a lawyer at his Anti-Corruption Foundation.

Police in black balaclavas, armed with crowbars, launched raids at their flats and offices across Moscow, as a criminal case was opened for calling a protest mid-pandemic. The fact that Moscow's mayor just lifted a curfew on bars and nightclubs, claiming that Covid-19 is in retreat, made no difference.

On Friday, a court placed the three under house arrest for two months, barred from using the internet, while the investigation continues.

The Kremlin spokesman denies the prosecutions are politically motivated, telling journalists that law enforcement officers are "just doing their job".

But with another day of demonstrations ahead, the authorities clearly want to remove the ringleaders.

'We have to protest'

The crackdown may well shrink the crowd this weekend: criminal cases have been launched against ordinary protesters, too - serious charges, including violence against police and hooliganism.

But many have vowed to come out regardless.

"We share one problem, the way we're governed," Danya says - a student who was detained last Saturday along with several friends. "We're all protesting for one thing: the alternation of power."

His friend Kirill says their group were standing quietly when the police "flew at us and started to beat us with their batons".

"I'm not a direct supporter of Navalny," Kirill explains, but he considers his treatment "illegal". "So as citizens of a country we love and want to be better, we have to protest."

One person who definitely won't join him is Filip Kuznetsov, who still has several days of his sentence left to run.

But on Friday he sent word that he and other protesters were being moved "at great haste".

"They're making space for the protest on the 31st," he messaged me, before being bundled into another police van and driven to a detention centre for illegal migrants 100km (60 miles) out of town.

https://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-55827509

